this is our to do list today for casaverde:

1. update and fix casaverde_server so it runs correctly and prints a log to ~/build_output/linux/logs/
2. update and fix casaverde_controller so it runs correctly and prints a log to ~/build_output/linux/logs/
3. update and fix casaverde_app so it runs correctly and prints a log to ~/build_output/linux/logs/
4. rewrite build.sh to fix any pathing issues when building the binaries
5. determine where casaverde_sim binary needs to be as its meant to run as a simulation test environment and isn't part of the release or production version. 
6. determine how simulation.sh should be running and how the simulation.py tests should simulate. they're simulating a fully automated hydroponic system (water flow rate, water level, ambient temperature, water temperature, water valve open/closed, humidity, etc). 
7. maintain the two REAL world sensor data: blackbeard-cpu (which will be renamed to ambient tempearture) which is my arch linux cpu temperature reading that is being retrieved and used by I/O pin 2 and the logic for the controller changes the state of relay 1. then theres the DS18B20 temperature probe which is going into the water reservoir to monitor "water temperature". the data line is connected to pin 6 on my arduino. i need to make sure that relay 2 which is connectged to pin 3 uses the data from pin 6 to turn on off. this may be a simple rewiring of the device on the breadboard. for now, just know that pin 6 is the data tx/rx from the probe and pin 3 is relay 2 which is what im relying on to turn an LED on/off based off the tempearture of the probe.
8. we need to update all sensor data and sensor names to match the simulated data and the real world data. 
9. we need to be able to run the server, and controller without needing the casaverde_sim to be running at all. then we need to be able to launch casaverde_app to monitor sensors, view the config, and manually override the relays that are connected pins 2, 3, 4, and 5. IO on pins 2, 3, 4, 5 are connected to their own 5V relay. each relay controls an LED to give a visual status of the device reading and let me know that this would be working as designed. 
10. the arduino is a dumb controller. im not programming logic into the arduino. it is not going to control anything. im building casaverde_controller to be what controls a custom PCB based off an arduino R3 uno design. right now, i dont have my prototype pcb so the arduino r3 uno is the current hardware im using to do this. 
11. we need to make sure this works on the same system (same computer) and i still need to be able to set the ip:port for each binary for testing on multiple systems. meaning, the server runs on 10.0.0.12, the app runs on 10.0.0.6, and the controller runs on 10.0.0.49 the raspberry pi for example. the default setup is that the same device/system is running all three binaries.
12. update app visual look to be what the original looked like for color, highlight, etc